my friends it is easy to mistake burnout
for laziness but let me tell you right
now these are very different things and
you've got to learn to tell the
difference the problem is there are
people who are being lazy and they are
blaming it on burnout but then there are
also people that really are pushing too
hard and they're burning out mistaking
it for laziness your ability to
determine the difference between the two
is going to determine whether or not
you're able to find success so pay
attention my friends because in this
episode you are going to learn how to
define these differences so that you can
put them to use in your own life let's
get into it
if you want to burn out fast in your
life pursue something that you don't
care about think this is where most
people get trapped they're living
somebody else's life or they're living
an unexamined life they've actually
never taken the time to stop and think
about what they really want not what
they're told they should want what they
actually want the thing that gives you
more energy because the thing that
causes people to think that they're
burning out is that they're actually
just putting in energy into something
that they don't care about because let
me tell you you are light years away
from burning out the amount of time and
energy that you can put into something
if you're sleeping and you're getting in
fact that's what we have to get in we
should probably start there
the number one thing that causes burnout
there's really two things one you're not
dealing with your biology correctly and
number two you're pursuing something you
don't care about so let's take them one
at a time number one are you getting
sleep the odds are that you're confusing
fatigue with burnout burnout is
something very specific burnout is where
you were in love with something and you
were going so hard and your life is
getting overwhelming that even though
you love it even though you are
optimized physically you're still
frazzling at the edges let's set that
aside because most people never get
there most people trip themselves up
with
de-prioritizing their sleep not
exercising nearly enough not getting
their diet on point and if you're not
sleeping exercising eating right
meditating doing all the things you need
to do to optimize your physiology you're
going to think that you're burning out I
remember one time I was having a
conversation with somebody and they were
trying to convince me that they had
adrenal fatigue
if your diet is all over the place and
you're having that conversation as
you're eating something that's highly
processed high in sugar you are making
it impossible for your body to process
ATP
adrenal fatigue is something so far down
the line from just getting the blocking
and tackling right in your life
if your answer is fancy you better be
really optimized most people their diet
is a mess their diet is causing them to
sleep poorly they're also doing terrible
sleep hygiene habits so they're sleeping
bad even if their diet is right they're
not exercising they're not doing the
things they need to do to be able to
actually just generate ATP and I know
that is wholly uninteresting and none of
us want to be talking about the
physiological part of this the biology
but that's reality so get that right
first the next thing is do you care
about the thing you're pouring your time
and energy into you need to be living
the life that you actually want to live
not living the life the people tell you
you're supposed to want not living the
life that your parents wish that they
had lived but living a life that
actually gives you more energy than it
takes this really does come down to
energy without even intending to I'm
talking about the two ways you can get
energy physiologically and
psychologically okay if you're unclear
on how you get psychological energy
think about this
you were downtrodden you've had a
terrible day you are exhausted
and then you put on your favorite song
and you get a little bit hyphy and
you're feeling a bit more energy that is
psychological energy that's you getting
excited about something that's something
changing your neurochemistry okay that's
not addressing what's going on at the
ATP level that's just addressing
psychologically are you feeling good so
when you pick a career path when you
decide that thing you're going to pour
energy into
you want to make sure that it's
something that gives you energy it does
not mean that you're going to be able to
work forever and that there is no limits
see the first part of my answer this
needs to be something uh that is coming
after you get your physiology into place
but assuming that you have your
physiology in place you want to make
sure that the thing that you're into
gets you into a loop of passion now
passion has to be created it is a
process passion is not an archaeological
dig it is an architectural build it's
something that you put together you
create it and one of the big problems
with people burning out is that they
don't actually realize that you don't
you're not born with a passion you're
born with things that are going to
interest you you're born with things as
you encounter them for whatever reason
they speak to your personality okay
we're all about 50 hardwired and 50
malleable so there are going to be
things that you respond to positively
that other people don't and vice first
that other people may love chocolate ice
cream but you may hate it other people
may love building a business but you
hate it other people may be really into
sports and you hate it vice versa you
need to find the thing that you're into
once you find that thing now we know
what we're going to pursue to see if
it's going to become a passion and there
is a process that you walk through and
it goes like this you experiment you try
a bunch of things when you find the
thing that gives you more energy than it
takes now you're going to engage with it
more deeply as you engage with it more
deeply you're going to see if it turns
into a Fascination so take the example
that people give about magic or
filmmaking there's two kinds of people
in the world there are people that as
they learn how the magic trick is done
they get more excited and then there are
people that as they learn how the magic
trick is done it loses all of the magic
and now they couldn't be less interested
same thing with filmmaking there are
people that as they learn how the
special effects are created it's more
enthralling that you can make this
seamless world for other people it's
like oh that's how it's done like that's
really boring and so they lose interest
so as you go down the path of learning
about how something works engaging with
it more deeply are you getting more
excited as you realize how the sausage
is made or are you turned off if you're
turned off
that's something that's taking more
energy than it gives so now you're going
to want to Pivot and try something else
Kevin Kelly has a really fascinating
idea around this and he says don't
prematurely optimize so many people
become lawyers and bankers because they
think oh my God I'm going to make a lot
of money
and they prematurely optimize for money
instead of trying that trying skydiving
professional gaming building a YouTube
channel
uh Drop Shipping whatever it is being a
doctor whatever go try a bunch of things
see which ones you're into once you've
sampled the buffet widely
then you can begin to narrow your focus
okay as we go down we realize we are
fascinated the more I learn about this
thing the more I'm into it now that's a
real potential for passion but passion
requires requited love it needs to be
returned back to you so unrequited love
is the bad stuff that's where you love
something that doesn't love you back
kind of how I feel about ice cream
and you can find something that as you
pour yourself into it gives you
something and so that Loop looks like
this let's take guitar it's my classic
example
your parents may tell you that getting
good at guitar is never going to be a
career maybe yes maybe no but it can
certainly become a passion how you
engage with it you see that it gives you
more energy than it takes you really go
down the path of learning how to get
good this is where you realize yeah I'm
fascinated by this as I learn the
mathematical structures of chord
progressions I'm more into this than
ever amazing now as you get good at it
this is where it becomes potential
passion so as you gain Mastery you are
now going to enter into a reciprocal
relationship with the audience whether
that's building a business or playing
the guitar doesn't matter you have an
audience a customer whatever you want to
call them it's somebody that's going to
give you feedback for the thing you're
putting out into the world so you are
putting out into the world in this case
music if people respond and like whoa
you really elevated my mood going back
to that earlier example of psychological
energy you're able to create music that
makes people feel better or feel the way
that they want to feel and they give you
that feedback that makes you feel good
you realize you've put something of
value out into the world that makes you
want to get better at it
that is the loop of passion now the
harder you work at this thing that gives
you more energy than it takes the more
that you gain Mastery the more that you
get feedback from the world the better
you feel the more you want to pursue it
the better you get the more you
Influence People the more you Influence
People the more it comes back as
positive energy the better you want to
get and it just keeps going in this Loop
okay this is the game of fulfillment now
if you want to have the kind of energy
that you're going to need to push
through all the difficulties that we
will inevitably talk about in this
episode you are going to need
to be following the formula for
fulfillment which is very simple you
have to work very hard
to acquire a set of skills that allow
you to serve yourself and the group and
I wish I could do four more easily
but you get the idea
if you're pursuing fulfillment
fulfillment is a neurological State a
neurochemical state it's a better way of
saying it that is going to
stay intact through grief suffering
failure embarrassment all of it it's the
only thing happiness is transient you
can't be happy and grieving at the same
time but you can be grieving and
fulfilled at the same time having
respect for yourself feeling like you're
making progress in life adding something
of value to the world that's fulfillment
now if you do that in a way that serves
you
now you've really got something so
understanding that is the first place
that you have to solve for if you want
to know am I actually burning out or not
and most people don't most people are in
a world where
they don't care about what they're doing
and they have not optimized their
physiology if you get stuck in either of
those two things you literally can't
create the ATP at the level that you
need to create because you're not
addressing your biological needs or you
don't care about the thing you're trying
to pour yourself into and zapping all of
your energy because of it it's going to
defeat you psychologically from a
psychological energy perspective even
before you get to the ATP and most
people fail at both levels which is why
people think that they're burning out
when in reality you just don't care
here's the thing that you need to
understand about the difference between
burnout and laziness most people are
lazy but
the reason that you're lazy isn't
necessarily what you think it is not a
moral deficiency and as we go through
this episode I want you guys to
understand being lazy is not a moral
deficiency this is not a failing of you
as a person I am profoundly lazy now
I've accomplished what I've accomplished
and keep pushing harder than I've ever
pushed not because I'm not lazy but
because I care deeply about the things
that I'm doing and that allows me to
overcome my laziness now the question
becomes
if laziness isn't a moral failing which
is almost certainly what you've been
told what you've internalized what you
believe what the hell is it
laziness is very simple
you're having a biological experience
that is the Epitaph I want on my
Tombstone I want people to understand
that you're having a biological
experience and if you don't address your
biology you're going to be in trouble
laziness
is a part of your biology
how so
it goes like this the human animal
through millions of years of evolution
has had to seek calories and conserve
calories
your brain alone it's what three pounds
so it's like something like two or three
percent of your body mass it must weigh
a slightly more than that so five pounds
and it makes up two to three percent of
your body mass
but it takes up 25 of your calories
that's insane your brain takes up I
don't know how it compares to your quads
but it's probably more and when you
think about from a biomass perspective
your legs are way bigger than your brain
and yet your brain is working so hard to
do all the things that it needs to do
that it's just gobbling up those
resources so the reason that you are
lazy is because nature had to make sure
that you would go out hunt face to saber
tooth tiger all of that stuff but then
it also had to make sure that you were
lazy so that you didn't need to go face
an unnecessary number of saber-toothed
tigers if all the time you'll just go go
go go go go go in an evolutionary
environment that would make no sense
because it is so dangerous
to get out in the world now this is why
people are morbidly obese today because
you have the compulsion to eat the
calories the calories used to be very
hard to get used to be very dangerous to
acquire now they are not so you have
this desire to overeat to stuff your
face full of those delicious potato
chips ice cream fried food and yet
you also have the impulse to be lazy as
the day is long even as I'm saying ice
cream potato chips fried food and
sitting on the couch I want to do that
right now I want to stop recording this
very second and go shovel food into my
face and lay on the couch
sounds amazing because I have this
competing desire to acquire the calories
and be lazy so that I don't burn too
many calories and make my foraging and
my hunting
to elevate it to a level where now the
risk and reward is just too much
so your biology is doing this weird
competing thing and this is why despite
as hard as I work I'm constantly having
to overcome the desire to lay in bed or
lay on the couch and eat chips and just
zone out
okay now that you know that it's not a
moral failing what are you going to do
to overcome it you're going to find the
things that get you excited you're going
to find something that's worth pursuing
and that's the key you have to find
something that you're willing to as my
dad gave me a plaque that says find
something that you would die for and
live for it
so you're going to find that thing that
really matters to you and all of us
again from an evolutionary standpoint to
survive you needed to make sure that the
group wanted to protect you to make sure
that the group wanted to protect you you
had to make sure that you contributed to
the group so we have this buried in our
brains this directive that absolutely
insists that we contribute to the group
and this is why when people detach
themselves from the group they become
too isolated they get into a very dark
place and they begin to rebel against
the group because they feel ostracized
and shunned which is the kind of thing
your brain screams
is dangerous
and it is dangerous it was dangerous
historically and it's dangerous now from
people getting into
psychological dysfunction
so understand
that you are always going to have the
compulsion to be lazy
that isn't necessarily burnout
it's off a mistake for Burnout because
we all psychologically want to give into
that laziness the psychological immune
system kicks in and it tells us no no
laziness is is a moral failing you're a
good person you would never fail morally
now the bad news is this is mistake on
two levels mistake number one is that
you think that laziness is a moral
failing mistake number two is that you
allow your psychological immune system
to kick in
so I highly encourage you guys all to
pattern interrupt
I never assume I'm burned out man I'm
gonna test myself six ways to Sunday
before I go ah maybe this really is
burnout because I know that laziness is
going to be presented to me by my
biology by the psychological immune
system long before I'm able to get to
burnout because my brain is trying to
protect myself from using my calories
unnecessarily so I'm constantly saying
to myself hey stop being lazy get up get
going do you really care about this
thing or not and if you care about this
thing then you're going to push through
the difficulty one of my favorite quotes
from David Goggins is when you think you
are broken
when you think you are defeated when you
think you could not possibly take
another step you're only 40 of the way
there
40 of the way there not 50 not 60 not 90
40. you're not even halfway you are not
even halfway to what you are capable of
doing from a biological perspective and
you need only look at Tales of like have
you ever watched the show I shouldn't be
alive
watch it you will very quickly
understand that the human body is
capable of the most insane things you
can imagine I'm talking about people
whose legs have been pulverized by giant
Boulders figuring out a way to survive
if you've seen them with what's at 187
hours or whatever his hand gets trapped
by a boulder he cuts it off with a
pocket knife has to cut through oh God
the nerve the literal nerve
had to sever his own hand
and then hike back out and find his way
to safety
what the human animal is capable of is
it's insane when you think you are
broken you were only at 40 knowing that
what are the odds that this is actually
burnout and not laziness basically zero
so always assume this is laziness until
you've really gone through am I doing
everything I can to optimize my
physiology am I pursuing something that
I really care about how many hours am I
working by the way am I actually working
a lot of hours you're not burned out at
40 hours I will tell you you don't care
about what you're pursuing fair enough
you have an optimized your biology fair
enough you're not burned out are you
burned out of 60 hours no are you burned
out at 80 hours probably not I've worked
93 hours a week on average obviously
sometimes less but I have worked 93
hours on average for 10 years and before
that it was probably 75 to 80. so I've
been working a stupid amount of hours
for a whole lot of years and I'm telling
you the thing that you will collide with
every day is laziness and not burnout
but I want to say again I'm not cool for
working a lot of hours laziness is not a
moral failing this is just about
understanding how your mind is messing
with you to make sure that you are able
to push through all of that stuff to get
to an end point that you care about but
the question is do you actually care
about your endpoint or not
that's where people fail
so the difference is yes at some point
this really is going to be burnout
I worked roughly 120 hours for eight
months that was burnout that really got
to a point where my my head was just not
in the right place I do pull my wife
aside and say look I'm being a terrible
[__] husband I will find my way back
to you
not smart
that at that point you're not getting
enough sleep
I certainly wasn't doing things out of
excitement
it there is a point where it becomes
burnout
but you have to address the stack
leading up to that first overcome all of
the biology pushing you towards laziness
then if we're just working too many
hours in fact I I will say this if
you're not sleeping enough because
you're working too much that is a sign
that you're approaching burnout because
you just won't be able to deal with the
physiological demands
in fact
we can probably anchor burnout to
physiology
burnout is I'm now pushing so hard my
body can't keep up
it's going to be a different number for
everybody so it's not like I can just
say oh you burn out at 119 hours it's
not going to work like that it's going
to be different based on where you're at
in your life how your diet is what's the
state of your microbiome how much do you
love what you're doing do you have
people in your life that love you there
are going to be a lot of things that are
going to feed into the biological energy
and the psychological energy the truth
is hitting your career goals is not easy
you have to be willing to go the extra
mile to stand out and do hard things
better than anybody else but there are
10 steps I want to take you through that
will 100x your efficiency so you can
crush your goals and get back more time
into your day you'll not only get
control of your time you'll learn how to
use that momentum to take on your next
big goal to help you do this I've
created a list of the 10 most impactful
things that any High achiever needs to
dominate and you can download it for
free by clicking the link in today's
description alright my friend back to
today's episode
[Music]
as the biology begins to send you Clues
let's talk about some of the ugly ones
no one wants to talk about
do you have diarrhea that's probably a
bad sign are you in bed but unable to
sleep that's a bad sign
um are your stress levels through the
roof that's a bad sign now I know people
that get stressed at 20 hours a week so
that doesn't mean that that isn't
Tangled Up In laziness or Tangled Up in
uh not organizing your sense of self in
the right way
or not organizing your finances in the
right way but you could be going through
something let's say that you just found
out that your child is being bullied
that's going to slather on a whole lot
of stress let's say that you just found
out oh God that your child is sick your
spouse is sick you have cancer God
forbid okay all of those things
they can take you to burnout real fast
but there's gonna be that physiological
component of something is happening
psychologically that's breaking you down
physiologically you've got to be
thoughtful you've got to get your
physiology organized before you just
give in
but that's an easy way to begin to
differentiate between laziness and
burnout when we've got the physiological
components kicking off we need to
address that first
get that in line then we can begin to
address the laziness
This is complicated this is more
complicated than I thought it would be
as I set out to answer these questions
but that's really how I think about it
optimize your body
distrust your emotions because they're
going to tell you to be lazy from the
jump
make sure that you're pursuing something
that you care about
and then
hold yourself to a high ass standard
most people just don't expect much of
themselves
that's the Cold Truth most people
accept the low standard for themselves
that's just facts
that makes me sad
because you can do incredible things
with your life but you really have to
toughen the [__] up buttercup
that's the fact
it really is and that's fun it's
exciting it's exhilarating to finally
realize oh [__] I don't have to be weak
my entire life which is how I felt I was
so weak deep into my 20s deep into my
20s
so again not a moral failing you just
have the wrong mindset
get your mind right push yourself hold
yourself accountable hold yourself to a
high ass standard you will Dazzle
yourself with what you're capable of God
forbid you need to get your hand trapped
by a boulder and chew through your own
[__] tendon like a coyote to realize
how much you're capable of but holy hell
you're capable of a lot more than you
think
if you realize that you're lazy as you
watch this
there are actually steps that you can
take to get better the first one is
you need to come up with a value system
what do you value I'll tell you right
now in myself I value being a hardcore
[__] it's written into the
culture document of this company be
hardcore be hardcore push yourself make
demands find the edges of your physical
mental and emotional capabilities and
when you find them be angry about how
weak you are oh man this is really a
glimpse into my soul this is how I think
people are going to hate this answer and
I'm telling you right now if you want to
achieve something great hold yourself
accountable be very angry about how weak
you are and get stronger every day hold
yourself accountable to that I have the
[__] chills hold yourself accountable
to getting better every day no matter
how far you go you've not hit the edges
of human potential it is so fun to see
how far you can push yourself but you
have to let go of the idea that just
because you're weak today means you're a
bad person you're not a bad person
that's not what it's about it's about
realizing that the human animal is
designed to grow and get better but you
you have to give yourself
one impulse and that impulses grow or
die
grow or die everyone should transform
their physique I find the gym tedious
and boring but it's also the most
important thing I've ever done in my
life to show myself that I could change
when you walk in the gym
these numbers aren't going to impress
anybody but they matter to me
when I first walked into the gym
dead lifting 180 pounds was terrifying
and I was really worried that I was
going to hurt my back
and I had to work my way up to that I
had to imagine my wife being physically
assaulted in order to get myself to show
up to the gym every day and say you're
too weak it's not okay to be this week
and if somebody attacked your wife you
wouldn't be able to stop them and that
did not make me feel good but man did it
make me angry
and it allowed me to hold myself to a
standard and channel it now it took me
years but at the height of my dead
lifting
I could deadlift 385 pounds I want to
round up and say almost 400 but it was
385 pounds and I remember thinking whoa
I can bend over and pick up
385 pounds
now for the guys out there that can
deadlift you know 600 pounds that's not
very exciting but for me
it changed my sense of myself
and even though I can't deadlift 385
pounds as of today
that sense of who I am and what my
potential is and how far I can push
myself stayed with me
and it influenced my abilities in
business and my tenacity to keep going
but it required me to be deeply
unsatisfied with myself
didn't mean I didn't love myself it
didn't mean I didn't respect myself
but it meant that I had to build my
respect around showing up every day and
demanding more of myself
it's a nuanced thing it is the
difference between
over time building the life that you've
always wanted and feeling like you're a
victim
if you feel like a victim it's because
you don't yet know what you're capable
of as Kobe Bryant said booze don't block
dunks you can get so good at something
that people can't stop you even if they
want to even if they're trying even if
they're working their ass off every day
just to destroy you you can get so good
they can't stop you am I the only one
with a fetish for that idea you can
actually get so good people can't
[__] stop you
that gets me up every day that I can get
so good at business people can't [__]
stop me like right now as I'm filming
this we are in a recession and we're
marching towards something that is
[__] scary what's the thing that gets
me through that I can get so good people
can't stop me
that I can get so good at conveying
ideas that people will pay me an obscene
amount of money to do it that I never
have to worry that I know I can add
value to people's lives that I can reach
through this [__] camera right here
and I can change your life and because I
can change your life I know that some
subset of you will feel that I've added
so much value that you'll be there for
me when I need you it's insane
this is open to everybody but you have
to hold yourself accountable you have to
push yourself every day you have to
demand that you're able to add value to
the world but if you push yourself to
get better and add more value to the
world every day you will never want for
things that really matter I'm not saying
that you're going to get rich I'm not
even saying that I can stay Rich all I'm
saying is that I know I can add value to
the world and as long as I can add value
to the world
never have to worry about having a roof
over my head food in my stomach or
people that love me
boys and girls please for the love of
God understand that you are capable of
far more than you think
you're capable of more than I think and
you're capable in my mind of a lot
get out hold yourself accountable
don't allow yourself to be weak and
trust me this is what I need to remind
myself of I'm not above this this is the
thing I've struggled with the most
profoundly in my life is this constant
gravitational pull towards laziness and
weakness
but I demand better of myself and
because of that I get better because I
don't tolerate laziness because I don't
tolerate laying in bed longer than I'm
supposed to I don't tolerate not putting
in the energy in the effort to get
better I don't tolerate sitting in
Failure I don't tolerate sitting there
feeling embarrassed crying over spilled
milk I only allow myself to do that
which moves me towards my goals and if
getting in the gym and busting my ass if
getting into the business ring octagon
is what I have to do in order to get
better if I have to take punches and
kicks to the face in order to learn and
grow then that's what I'm going to do
and when you hold yourself accountable
like that you really do get better it's
extraordinary that is the gift that
Evolution has given you if you give
yourself the signal to adapt or die
you'll adapt
you will grow
but you have to give yourself that
signal you have to lift weights
sustained
heavy pushing getting better
if you do that the muscle tears a little
bit
and then it heals stronger
same thing with your mind push yourself
outside of your comfort zone be willing
to fail
be willing to
embarrass yourself be willing to lose be
willing to lose money be willing to lose
face
just don't [__] with your integrity
if you do all of that you can get back
up
learn and keep going and what will
happen
you will be propelled forward like a
rocket ship because everybody else is
going to give up
the truth most people give up
most people give up they get broken life
breaks people
it's why they say genius is a young
man's game you develop Scar Tissue as
you go man life is going to do
everything it can to break you down and
it is only a value system and a belief
system that's going to keep you being
the man in the arena
build that value system
push yourself
stay accountable
stay hard stay hungry
that's it if you don't have purpose in
life I can promise you that you are not
going to push through all of the
difficult things in your life to achieve
the things you want to achieve so the
question becomes if you don't have
purpose
how do you find it now the problem is
finding your purpose is a misnomer and
it is the verbiage here that causes
everybody to
fail in life to be unhappy to lead a
life of quiet desperation
and the word in all of that that's off
is fined you don't find your purpose you
create your purpose you decide what your
purpose is going to be now you do find
your interest and your purpose should be
based on something that you have
interest in and this is why the idea of
finding it lingers but you're never
going to find your purpose there's never
going to be anything that you encounter
on first glance you're like oh my God
that hits me so hard that I'm going to
do that thing in fact the number in fact
this is almost certainly true in your
own life you're like oh my God this is
amazing that's going to be my purpose
I'm going to save us all from climate
change I'm gonna be uh
um I'm gonna help the kids I'm gonna
build schools in Africa like whatever
you're gonna find something man when you
first hear about it it really speaks to
your soul and I'm not saying that that
feeling is trite that feeling is real
but if you don't understand
that that feeling is fleeting that it
will pass as Mike Tyson says everybody
has a plan until they get punched in the
face
everybody has a plan until they get
fatigued the uh forget who said it but
the other quote that just my God this
haunts my dreams fatigue makes cowards
of us all
when you get tired all of a sudden that
purpose
is not going to feel so real and you
will give up so if you can identify
something quickly and say that it's your
purpose why then am I saying that it's
not really your purpose until you decide
because once you decide something is
your purpose the whole point of deciding
is that you have to build around it to
make it real and if you don't go through
the process of cementing that thing as
legitimately your purpose in life the
reason that you exist is to do that
thing then you won't have the juice that
you need to have to fight through the
boredom by the way which is going to be
the number one killer of Dreams
boredom it's boring the things that you
have to do to actually get good at
something it it can really border on
torture it's so repetitious it's so
draining it's not what you want to do
all your friends are out partying having
a good time
and you're working on whatever boring
thing it is you have to do for me it's
often legal contracts I hate reading
legal Contra I hate it so much
it makes me question all the things that
I say that I want in life and that's
when I realize that I've done a good job
of building my purpose I've done a good
job of walking the process to make that
purpose real at a neurochemical level
and it goes like this you find that
thing that gives you more energy than it
takes you go down the process of passion
which I answered earlier once you have
the process of passion locked in now
you're going to give purpose to that
passion I'm doing this thing that I'm
passionate about for this reason
remember for passion to really take hold
it has to serve yourself and the group
so now you're going to take the way in
which that thing serves the group and
you're going to put it at the center of
your life you're going to take that
ember and you're going to Fan those
Flames until it is a raging Inferno by
saying I'm doing this thing for this
reason because it contributes to the
group in this way so I'll give you an
example
from the time that I was 12 I've known
that I've wanted to be a Storyteller but
until I was probably about 35 I just
wanted to tell stories because I love
telling stories but I didn't have
purpose there was no meaning behind it
all then at Quest I was working in the
inner cities which I'd actually been a
big brother in the inner city before
that for a long time
and so I had the seed planted in my soul
that you could really help somebody
at Quest realizing just how many amazing
incredible people end up doing nothing
with their life because they have the
wrong frame of reference not because
they couldn't do something but because
they have the wrong frame of reference
so they don't walk down a path that will
actually lead them to building the set
of skills that they need to actually go
and do something so I was like okay
can I just tell people what I've done to
change my own life I tried that and for
two percent of the people it really does
work but for 98 it doesn't work and so I
realized wait a second the way to make
these lessons work is to hit people on
an emotional level at scale through
story and that brought me background to
my original passion which was
storytelling
so I thought this is amazing this is a
way for me to take something that I
already love and want to do attach
purpose and meaning to it and now we can
really do something amazing but I had to
remind myself okay I'm telling stories
because I believe that the best way to
incept people with an empowering mindset
which is exactly what they will need to
do to do something incredible with their
lives to incept them with those ideas I
have to do it at an emotional level
through story that's how you hit people
at an emotional level that's why humans
are known as meaning making machines we
turn everything into a story to convey
the meaning so it just is a truism about
the nature of the human animal we tell
stories we convey meaning through
stories then I realize wait a second
it's not just that it's going to be the
ages of 11 to 15 because of another
principle of biology which is what's
known as the age of imprinting
kids begin to push back against their
parents
in that very special age which is the
Japanese actually have a name for it's
called Shonen which translates as the
few years so 11 to 15 the few years
where you really begin to establish your
identity by drinking deeply of the
culture so could I influence Culture by
influencing storytelling and the answer
is yes and so now it's not just about
writing a comic book or launching an nft
project or making a movie it's about
putting in these amazing ideas about
what people are capable of what they can
do how far they can push themselves all
the amazing Heroes Journey stuff that
they're going to be able to accomplish
in their life
by embedding it in the story and so in
the way that Star Wars led me to Yoda
Yoda led me to taoism and the ideas in
the Dao de Jing and then taoism changed
my life
that's the path that I want to walk
people now that's a lot cooler than
thinking oh I just want to make a movie
because I want to win an Academy Award
or whatever that's not going to get me
through those dark [__] nights when I
was working
120 hours a week for eight months and it
was like being kicked in the face over
and over it was detrimental certainly to
my longevity because I was [__]
stressed to the nines it was detrimental
to my marriage
just not a good look
but I was able to push through it
because I knew that I needed to to get
to the other side to build the thing
that I needed to build and create in
order to LeapFrog and get ahead
worked it was a [__] nightmare
but I would not have had the energy to
push through that nightmare the number
of times that I said this quote
When You're Going Through Hell
keep going
and the only reason I was able to do
that is because I had purpose behind it
I knew yo on the other side of this I'm
going to be able to help people
help people that would otherwise not be
able to achieve the extraordinary things
that they will be able to achieve if
they didn't encounter these ideas
now when you've got purpose like that
you'll push through
but you have to understand I didn't turn
inward
and find that purpose lurking there my
entire life
I built it up I reinforced that purpose
over and over and over and over telling
myself telling anybody who would listen
coming on camera and saying it even in
this answer I have reinforced that idea
in my own mind by embodying the thing
that I want to feel
as I say what my purpose is you have to
embody it
you have to get in that Loop of feeling
the way that you want to feel when you
say that that's your purpose and at
first it feels like you're faking the
funk but if you do it enough you really
will get that neurochemical response
that you want
when you think about what you're trying
to do so thankfully as I was going
through that very difficult period
I had for years
been building the association between
what I'm building what I'm creating and
the people that these ideas are going to
help and that the only way with my
talent and abilities and Passions
the only way that I'm going to be able
to do that
is your story
and that's it once you build that
passion once you
connect it to that purpose and you just
reinforce reinforce reinforce you will
have the juice that you need to see
things through
you got to build it I feel burnt out
just like anybody else but I'm not gonna
lie it takes a lot for me to feel burned
out in fact the they've really only been
two times that I felt burned out in fact
this is perfect the two times I've felt
burned out my life one was psychological
and then the other was physiological so
the first time that I felt burnt out I
had been showing up and chasing money
for about six and a half years so this
is back at awareness Technologies for
those that know my story
um showing up every day saying I'm here
to get rich I'm here to get rich I'm
here to get rich I'm here to get rich
and even though I did not care about the
product that we were making
I so believed that I could get rich and
that I owed my wife wealth and that for
me to make my dreams come true I had to
get wealthy
so I just showed up every day for that
and it was miserable and I would come
home every day and I would say to my
wife
don't ask me about my day
I don't want to talk about it
I'm so unhappy you just need to give me
space and for a long time she gave me
space
she was just like cool it's all good and
then at the six and a half year mark she
pulled me aside and she said I'm
watching you erode as a person
and it's now impacting our marriage and
so you need to do something about this I
was like
damn she's right and I want to feel
alive again so even though at the time I
was working less than I'm working now I
was so profoundly unhappy that I didn't
have the psychological energy that I
needed to push myself forward and so I
was never anywhere close to Breaking
physically now I see how much farther I
can push my physicality how much farther
I can go before I actually start burning
out on a physiological or stress level
but I was so unhappy I could not muster
the psychological energy that I needed
to keep going I didn't have the will to
keep competing
and so I went in and I quit
and it made me feel so icky I felt like
such a loser
to go in and quit
but I just couldn't do it man I couldn't
I couldn't justify it anymore I wanted
to feel alive I wanted to feel alive and
I know the people listening to this you
get it you know what it's like to feel
dead inside to be going through the
motions to ask yourself all the time why
am I doing this why am I doing this
this is miserable
and when you ask yourself that question
if you don't have a profound answer
you will quit
and this is why most people quit most
people quit if you want to get ahead in
life just don't quit just get a little
bit better every day because everybody
else is quitting but how do you have the
psychological energy to not quit what is
up my friend Tom bilyu here and I have a
big question to ask you how would you
rate your level of personal discipline
on a scale of one to ten if your answer
is anything less than a 10 I've got
something cool for you and let me tell
you right now discipline by its very
nature means compelling yourself to do
difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact I will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
all right I've just released a class
from Impact Theory university called how
to build Ironclad discipline that
teaches you the price process of
building yourself up in this area so
that you can push yourself to do the
hard things that greatness is going to
require of you right click the link on
the screen register for this class right
now and let's get to work I will see you
inside this Workshop from Impact Theory
University until then my friends be
legendary peace out
all this quiet quitting [__] people
celebrating that the weakness that
celebrated in culture right now makes me
sick for you I'm gonna win no matter
what because I'm not weak I keep pushing
through
but people accept some low ass standards
from themselves but it's not a moral
judgment you've tricked yourself into
thinking that trying to live a life that
doesn't fill you with the juice is worth
it so understand
you're burning out psychologically not
physiologically this isn't a physical
thing your adrenals aren't burned out
your diet probably sucks you're not
sleeping enough that's probably true but
the reality is you don't care about what
you're doing and because you don't care
about what you're doing you don't have
the energy to push through all the
boredom that comes along with trying to
do something great or the failure or the
embarrassment all the negative stuff
that is going to come for you because I
cannot promise you will ever be
successful but I can guarantee you're
going to struggle you're going to
struggle 100 that's a guarantee a
thousand percent I promise I know
nothing about your life other than
you're going to struggle everyone
struggles this is why you see
billionaires committing suicide kids
growing up in affluent neighborhoods
imploding
the opioid epidemic you're going to
struggle being a human is hard
but you burn out
because you don't have the psychological
energy
to get yourself in shape biologically to
make sure that you're not breaking apart
either
from a do I care about what I'm pursuing
perspective or do I have the ability to
actually generate energy at a cellular
level so
if you want to have the energy to figure
out where your limitations are make sure
that you actually care about pushing
through
so that was the first
I didn't care about what I was pushing
through the second time I burned out was
because I was working 120 hours a week
for eight months and even though I
really believed in what I was doing
it's just too much man it was too much I
reached the limit one I was eating into
my sleep which is Danger Zone Danger
Zone Danger Zone Danger Zone but I was
so stressed that it was getting hard for
me to manage my psychology to make sure
that I was getting enough sleep so I was
waking up without an alarm I was going
to bed just like I should every night at
nine o'clock I was having no trouble
falling asleep but I was having trouble
staying asleep and so I realized once
again my wife being the amazing human
being that she is I can always ping
myself off of is my marriage where it
should be or not and I could see yeah
I'm just working too much
and so I said look I will find my way
back to you once I make a promise to my
wife I'm going to uphold it and so I had
to find a way to begin reducing my hours
which would take us into a whole another
video where I explained that you need to
find the right people get the right
people on the team you need to
understand there's only so much that you
can and should be doing yourself uh that
you do have to build infrastructure that
was a big part of it and that once we as
a team really got focused on building
that infrastructure ah I could begin to
scale back so one day we'll do a whole
video case study around that
um but until then just know in this
moment it was really understanding that
we do all have a breaking point but if
you're putting in the time and the
energy to making sure that your breaking
point is really really really far away
you can accomplish some extraordinary
[__] what I did in those eight months
I'm so proud of I can't even begin to
tell you it was hard and dumb and I
could have done it way smarter but I'm
still proud of myself for having the
physiological and emotional fortitude to
be able to push really far before I hit
the point where I was like and now we've
reached burnout and by the way because I
have part of my value system is
understanding if you're hitting real
burnout like your stress levels are now
diminishing you at a biological level
doing less is always an option
now that's advanced class stuff because
most people stop at the 40 of what
they're actually capable of and so I
never want people being like Tom said
doing less is always an option and so
you do less and your life looks like uh
way less than it could way less than
you're proud of way less than will be
fulfilling because you reach for the
easy answer but
I do want to remind you that you need
the ability to differentiate between
just not pushing yourself far enough and
actually burning out and when you leave
it all out on the field every day and
you're playing to the best of your
abilities and you're pushing yourself
that when it really is burnout that you
need to say oh I need to do less I need
to do less I need to hug my wife
more I need to uh
watch
a movie that inspires me I need to go
out for ice cream with my friends
whatever
don't judge yourself for that it's about
fulfillment
it's not about breaking yourself in half
it just so happens that if you're wired
like me and you've got some serious
ambition and you realize oh my God I can
translate my potential into actual skill
set and I can actually get so good at
something that I love that helps people
that people can't stop me that is
intoxicating but you have to understand
that there is an upper bound to that and
that you can push yourself to the point
of breaking down so if you get there
make sure that you recognize that doing
less is always an option should be a
tool in your tool kit and when you get
to that point back off
back off
it's that simple but you've got to earn
that trust with yourself
so those were the two examples from my
life that was how I managed to get
myself out of those situations and made
those examples serve you as well as they
serve me
if you've identified accurately that you
really have pushed yourself to the point
of burnout and now you want to know how
do I begin to back my way out of that
the first thing is to make sure that you
have a good criteria by which to judge
whether this is laziness or burnout so
number one do you love what you're doing
number two are you still making progress
because even if you love what you're
doing if you've hit a plateau and you're
not pushing yourself to get beyond that
you may burn out just because
progress as Tony Robbins says is a
foundational pillar to human happiness
and so you really do need to be getting
better you need to be moving closer to
your goals and to do that you need to
hold yourself accountable to results so
many people
are building a vision of who they are
based on winning and other people's
perception that they're winning
you have to be very careful about that
because
you're going to spend this is actually
really interesting I don't think I've
ever said this like this before if
you're achieving something amazing in
your life from the outside 95 of the
time it's actually going to look like
you're failing
really interesting
so you've got to be very comfortable
because look we are both the shout and
the echo you are what you do and you're
the way that people respond to what you
do there's no way around that so
you're going to care about what other
people think but you have to take A Very
Long View to that so for instance most
of the time in my life I'm failing in
these like micro little ways right I'm
trying something that didn't work I had
an idea but it ended up not bearing
fruit whatever but because I'm
constantly learning and getting better
the things I'm failing at are just in a
way higher tier of thing to be doing and
so all the things that I can take for
granted that I don't even think about
anymore uh those all create the basis of
in the case of business the economic
engine whatever
so
you're able to take care of The Blocking
and tackling you're able to get things
moving you're able to generate momentum
in my case you're able to generate
Revenue all of that and so you're able
to see like the basic stuff that other
people might really struggle with but
you're still because you're trying to
push into that new Zone you're still
failing a lot and if I were to like even
now if you go into my comments you're
going to see people saying oh he's a
[__] [__] he has no idea what he's
talking about uh and so if I look at and
by the way that might be because I
really have said something stupid and so
if I say something stupid and I go in
the comments and I see what everybody's
saying and I'm like oh wow that really
hurts and it makes me want to pull back
and not push into a new area not try to
do something uh new be afraid to go out
on the limb and and really take a shot
at something
then I will Plateau and so you have to
be able to assess like am I not making
progress because I've become afraid
whatever for whatever reason it is that
you've plateaued you need to be very
careful because if you're not pushing
beyond that Plateau you're going to be
in trouble so there are a lot of
different reasons why you might be
experiencing that sense of burnout
because psychologically you're not
feeling good about what you're doing
but the other thing is because again
there are two ways you can experience
burnout psychological and physiological
so the other is you just might not be
producing energy at a cellular level so
many people most people the vast
majority of humanity is just out of
shape
they're just out of shape and let's say
the really unpopular thing if you're
overweight you are creating a problem
for yourself at a cellular level it just
is what it is and so stop immediately
don't judge yourself don't think that
you're a worse person because you're
overweight just recognize at a cellular
level I'm not doing myself any favors
and so I'm gonna burn out sooner than
somebody that's in shape that at a
cellular level is able to keep pushing I
am
sweating 50 years old I can't remember
I'm 47 I think I'm 47 at the time of
this recording I can never remember I'm
always a year sort of in One Direction
or the other
but bra
I've got energy for days for days
I can work even though I'm not
celebrating this but I am proud of the
fact that I could do it at a
physiological level I could work 120
hours roughly of course there were times
that it was less but I can work roughly
120 hours a week sustained and by the
way let's do the math because I know
people are going to say oh you're just
not doing the math no no that's 18 hours
a day Monday through Friday plus 14 to
16 hours a day Saturday and Sunday
don't do it it's stupid I'm just saying
like I don't advise that people go run a
bunch of marathons but if you ran one
you'd be proud of yourself I'm proud of
the fact that I could pull it off at a
cellular level even though the whole
time I was like you got to get the [__]
out of this
so
at a cellular level despite my advancing
age I am able to generate that energy I
can keep pushing because my diet is on
point
I sleep as much as I can I don't set an
alarm and haven't for over 15 years 16
17 something like that a lot of years
and I work out
I'm in the gym
not always five days a week which is my
goal but I'm in the gym I have a
bandwidth of where my physique is where
my energy levels are that I just do not
allow myself to get outside of
so
get yourself in shape push yourself get
your diet right that's hard that's
probably the most difficult one is for
people to maintain a good diet I get it
eating junk food is awesome but it has
real consequences at the cellular level
So You Gotta Be You got to be on point
with that you are what you eat and you
are what you eat eight so you turn over
all your cells so just keep that in mind
at depending on which cell we're talking
about at a very high rate so be very
thoughtful about what you eat
keep your physiology on point make sure
you're sleeping make sure you're
meditating
if you do that and you really
begin building
passion around what you're pursuing give
it purpose you'll be able to back
yourself at a burnout just by attacking
it from that position and then of course
doing less is always an option but it
should be the last option the number one
question I get asked is I feel stuck in
life what can I do to not be stuck
here is the reality if you are feeling
stuck in life I guarantee I guarantee
you don't have enough Clarity you don't
have enough Clarity people that are
stuck the reason you're stuck is you
don't know what to do with the next 15
minutes of your life this is where
budding entrepreneurs
anybody trying to accomplish anything it
all comes down to what are you going to
do with the next 15 minutes of your life
if you sit down and are like what should
I be doing you've already lost at all
times I know what I should be doing I
keep an important things list my
important things list is based on my
goals my goals will demand certain
behaviors if you want to win a gold
medal in the Olympics for swimming what
should you be doing if you're not
swimming
working out or eating right
or sleeping or visualizing those are
your five things if you're not doing one
of those things you're doing something
wrong so it would be very easy for them
to create their important things
listening to have a life that just
revolves around I know what my goal is
your goal makes demands your goal makes
demands what demands do your goals make
now the only other reason that you would
be stuck is I know what I want I know
exactly what I should be doing but I'm
not making progress now what do you need
you need to try new things you need to
get a coach you need somebody or
something that's going to allow you to
try something new because ultimately
that's it you need to be in the physics
of progress the reason I call it the
physics of progress is because this is
true for everybody across the world for
all time you come up with a hypothesis
about how you're going to reach your
goal
should be an informed hypothesis based
on your experience if you have no
experience then it's just going to be
your best guess
but your informed hypothesis
of a thing
that you could do
that would move you towards your goals
you're then going to do that thing run
that test
then you're going to assess the results
of that test did that move me towards my
goal yes or no if it moved you towards
your goal amazing do more of it if it
didn't then you're going to need to
adjust and try again the problem is that
as you do that thing and you assess the
results most people are you ready in
fact can you guess what do most people
do that completely mess them up ruin
their lives and destroy any hope they
have a forward progress
that's right they lie to themselves
everybody lies to themselves to some
degree and that's the problem most
people do not realize that there is a
thing called the psychological immune
system which is going to say you didn't
fail the world failed you the world does
not want people that look like you to
succeed whatever you didn't grow up with
money your parents didn't teach you uh
you grew up on your own whatever the
case may be people are always making
some excuse for why they failed when the
truth is
what you did didn't work you are not
good enough yet
and as long as you append yet on there
what does it matter you're not good
enough yet cool now you know you need to
get better now you know in what way you
need to get better
but the reality is the only thing that
stands between you and becoming what you
want to become is a set of skills the
great news is that all of us humans are
designed to transform potential into
actual usable skill set that's what the
human animal does that's why and how we
became the ultimate apex predator really
think about this for a second people
people take this for granted makes me
want to punch them in the throat
we in 60 years in 60 years six zero
years in 60 years we went from flying as
impossible to landing on the moon
anybody else freaked out by that
we went from flying as impossible to
landing on the moon in 60 years okay
that's what it means to get better
not all of us are going to be the best
at whatever it is we want to be the best
at okay there's only going to be one
greatest of all time that's just the
reality of the phrase greatest of all
time
but you can all get a hundred times
better than you are at anything that you
dedicate yourself to
so
dedicate yourself to getting better
that's how you get unstuck the problem
is people aren't clear
or
they're blaming other people or their
circumstances blaming your circumstances
that's so mid immediately stop blaming
your circumstances now here's the worst
part about excuses
they're real
they're legitimate the world really may
be stacked against you the world really
may not want you to succeed
but you can still find a path
but you've gotta look for it you've got
to push you've got to try things you've
got to find experts you've got to read
every book that you can you've got to
fall in your face over and over and over
and over and over and over and over and
over and over
constantly taking full responsibility
for the outcome even if there are other
people that it would be far too easy to
point the finger at you're going to take
complete responsibility because now
you're in control and as long as you
retain control people can't stop you if
you give your power away to other people
for very legitimate reasons I get it
I get it
but even if you have legitimate reasons
it doesn't help you it just means you
have to go that much harder the example
I always give my wife is half my size
she can match me calorie for calorie and
she won't put on fat like I will she'll
sweat through the bed sheets and it
really makes me angry like it makes me
angry and I'm not you're gonna think I'm
exaggerating I mean this literally she
can take her shirt off after a night of
cheating if we've really gone hard she
can ring actual droplets of sweat out of
her clothes that's freak that's freaky
right we can all agree that's weird I
don't that doesn't happen to me you can
hear me getting fatter okay that I'm
kidding about but it's so close to that
you can actually see if I have visible
muscles by the end of the evening
they're gone it's crazy
I retain water and put on fat
way faster than my wife
now I can complain about that as I've
done for the last 90 seconds or I can
accept that that's just true and so for
me to get really lean is going to be
hard now not to take anything away from
my wife she works out like a demon she
works out harder than I work out but
it's harder for me to lose fat it just
is what it is but when I set out to get
six-pack abs which is that is the
reality and so the fact that I have to
work harder than somebody else is
irrelevant
who am I arguing against who am I
fighting against it just is what it is
and so I can either try to go do
something to change myself the molecular
level
or I can just go look these are the
things that I have to do to hit my goals
and then do them and then when it isn't
working go well I need to change
something in my strategy or work harder
or both
but that's the reality that's the
reality deal with the world the way that
it is not the way you wish it were
one more time deal with the world the
way that it is not the way that you wish
it were
because you really can't overcome
anything
look at Stephen Hawking
the man could at the end of his life
blow in a straw and I think move his
eyes
and that was it and yet he developed
some of the biggest breakthroughs in
physics in the last 100 years
now according to him he never would have
had those breakthroughs were it not for
his condition he said if you don't help
yourself no one else is going to help
you
that's a guy who had every reason to
make all the excuses in the world I
can't fathom I can't fathom if tomorrow
I realized oh I'm gonna lose
use of every part of my body
I'm not even going to be able to speak
and to realize that no one's coming to
save me
and I can feel bad but that's not going
to change anything in fact it's going to
make things worse
I have to say okay cool it is what it is
and now how do I make this an awesome
life
not an okay life
not a good enough life how do I make
that the best thing that ever happened
to me
I love that frame
Tony Robbins says if you can flip it and
ask a different question and say how is
the worst thing that happened to me
actually the best thing that ever
happened to me now you start looking for
that answer
and you can really get somewhere but if
your Woe Is mean if you're decrying the
world you will waste time in that death
Loop while other people were saying how
do I make this work for me
how do I get so good that nobody can
stop me they go on to have all the
success
makes me sad that that's not a popular
answer I want to hear from the people
that want to flip over the desk in Joy
because they're like oh my God yes I
don't have to be stuck here I can push
forward I can figure this out I can keep
going and that the climb is the juice
you will never climb a summit so amazing
that you get to the top and don't want
to keep climbing this is why people get
emotionally devastated in their lives
either they get to the peak that they
thought was going to be the everything
and then they're like why don't I feel
satisfied or they never climb because
they're like [__] that mountain why
should I have to climb the mountain both
of those people are in trouble the
person that climbs the mountain and then
looks at that next Peak and is like I
got you [__] I'm taking you down too
I'm coming for you
those people
they love life
because they know that it's about
becoming capable of the climb that's
just what we're wired for that's the
thing that will make you feel awesome
about your life not achieving it not
getting to the peak becoming capable of
a more and more difficult climb now if
you focus on that the irony is you get
success
but don't focus on the success
focus on getting better at climbing
that's how you get unstuck I guarantee
you there's a way to build your life
where you are not going to feel burned
out I'm going to give you seven things
that you can do that will make sure that
you never feel burnout and the seventh
one everyone in this room is convinced
I'm out of my mind I'm not joking or
doing this to hype this is my challenge
to myself I literally sat down and
thought of what are the real things you
need to do and number seven is real and
is exactly what people need to hear
today so we are going to get to it and
at the end these people are going to see
this is the truth here we go all right
number one you need to build desire that
is critically important people do not
understand if you're not achieving the
things you want in life you just don't
want it badly enough think about this
really think about this from a literal
perspective for a second
I want you to imagine
you're being held underwater
if you've ever sat underwater you've got
a good 15 seconds where being underwater
is not troubling or nerve-wracking about
the 20 second Mark you're still okay but
you're starting to think oh I need that
breath around the 30 second Mark if you
haven't trained you would claw the eyes
out of whoever is holding you underwater
to get to the surface legitimately there
is nothing that you wouldn't do at that
point and
if you can learn to want whatever it is
you're trying to achieve in life and yes
I say learn if you can learn to want
whatever it is you're trying to achieve
in life as badly as a drowning person
wants their next breath of error you
will find a way to be successful and
that really is like when I think about
the core thing that makes somebody
successful it is
tenacity
relentlessness just you're unstoppable
because you are hell-bent to find the
answer now why is that about burnout why
would building desire be about burnout
because I've talked about this before
burnout is based on two things it's
either physiological burnout or
psychological burnout so you have to
make sure that you are building desire
you have got to want the things so that
psychologically you're not breaking now
for the sake of these seven things I'm
not going to go back into the body I've
talked about the body enough so just
know that you've got to get your body
right to not burn out
but you build desire that's I want you
to focus on that you're going to go in a
loop of building desire there is a
process to building desire and the
process goes like this you are going to
let people know that hey I want this
thing
you're going to tell yourself that you
want this thing and every time that you
tell yourself and you tell other people
that you want the saying you're going to
embody the feeling that you want to feel
I mean literally I'll do it right now so
I can talk about building desire like
this hey everybody you want to make sure
that you take the work the cycle of
building desire so that at the end that
you want something in your life as badly
as a drowning person would want their
next breath of air okay or I can do this
this is embodying it guys I'm not joking
you have got to find a way to embody the
thing that you want to feel you're going
to have to learn how to actually feel
inside by acting out the passion that
you want to feel about something you've
got to be able to do it on command
you've got to be able to literally
embody the thing you want to feel
whether it's excitement passion
intensity whatever you've got to be able
to embody it
that's how you do it you literally
change your physical state you change
the way that as you're saying inside
it's not oh I hope that I get this it's
like I'm going to get this nothing is
going to stop me from I want this so
badly I want this more than anything
I've ever wanted in my life
you're saying the intense words and
you're saying them in an intense way
whether you're saying them purely
internally without making a sound
whether you're saying it outwardly to
somebody else whether you're marching up
and down in a room which I've done more
times than I can count in my life like
really feeling that thing that you want
your brain is wired to hardwire whatever
you repeat
let me repeat that
you are hardwired too hard wire that
which you repeat so if you repeat
something over and over your brain goes
to a process called myelination it
becomes an easier thing to do so the
electrical impulse travels easier
between those two neurons than it did
before so it becomes the easier thing to
do it becomes the default state so if
I'm constantly saying I really want this
thing and I'm embodying that every time
I think about this topic I'm doing what
I'm doing now and I'm really feeling
that intensity then I'm going to feel
that desire over a period of time
because my brain is going to hardwire
that emotional state to that topic and
you can do this over and over this is
why you have to be very careful about
what you build desire around because you
can build desire around dumb things you
can actually hardwire this intense
connection
between that feeling and something
stupid so be careful
but if your goal is Honorable it's
something that's exciting to you and you
build desire around it and it's
something that feeds you emotionally and
it's something that allows you to serve
the group now it's like the more you
pour yourself into that the more that
you want it like let me tell you right
now I am trying to build the next Disney
the reason I'm trying to build the next
Disney is because I believe to the core
of my being that the way that you get
people to have a growth mindset at scale
is through story so I've got to build
that engine where I can tell stories to
people that reach the masses that free
people from right now the number one
predictor of your future success is your
ZIP code I'm not okay with that and I've
spent so much time thinking about how I
can break that Paradigm how there are
people in my life who I love that have
suffered needlessly because they are a
victim
of their zip code and of course you know
my feelings about being a victim but the
only way to get them to realize that
they're not a victim is to give them
these ideas so they are being trapped by
their ideas in a way that I get them out
is through story now I have rehearsed
that Loop so many times thinking about
the people that I love and how badly I
want this
that I have I feel even right now I'm
actually feeling the energy that I want
to feel about how badly I want to do
this which is why I'm able to do the
things that I do day in and day out
seven days a week
even when I go away on my annual
vacation for my anniversary I work seven
days a week
I work
365 days a year including Christmas
why
because I want it that badly I love this
[__] I absolutely love what I do I'm all
in not because somebody from the outside
not because I need the money because I
want it I've spent the time building
that desire so that I feel the thing
that I want to feel when you feel the
thing that you want to feel when you're
pushing and going hard after something
it feels awesome nobody has to convince
me to work no one should have to
convince you to pursue the thing that
you want the reason that they do the
reason that you feel stuck the reason
that you're burning out is because you
don't want it badly enough that's number
one we've got six more to go baby but
when you put in the time you can
actually avoid burnout all right number
two pursue something you love please
so many people pour time and energy into
something that is eroding their sense of
self that it's actually breaking you
down it's making you less of what you
want to be the punch line of life is not
working hard the punch line of life is
not making a lot of money the punch line
of life is fulfillment
it's feeling good about yourself
when you're by yourself that matters
that matters a lot
how do you get there
focus on something that you love
pursue something that gives you energy
build passion
build passion it won't come naturally
it's not buried inside of you
passion is something that you create
that you develop based on hey I've
experimented I've played around with a
lot of things this is the one that I
really like the more I engage with it
the more that it allows me to create
something that the world values I get
that reflection back that the world
values this and that
is how you fall in love
so many people are living a life that
somebody else wants them to live or it's
allowing them to make the kind of money
that they want to make
I've run the experiment for you you can
get rich and hate your life
there's no point
there's no point why would you do that
how many billionaires have to commit
suicide before you realize that money
isn't going to solve your problems
accolades aren't going to solve your
problems
the only thing that's going to solve the
problem which we all know intuitively
but haven't said
and that is not feeling good about
yourself when you're by yourself when
there's no one there to Hype you up
what do you think about yourself
and the only way to solve for that is to
really pour yourself into something that
you love and the only way to really fall
in love with something is to do
something that gives you that positive
feedback you enjoy doing it but it also
serves other people I don't believe in
one way love
infatuation yes Obsession yes love not
so much
love is a two-way street so you're doing
something that you're passionate about
and the world is like damn give me more
of that please
that's when you fall in love with
something that's when you can fall in
love with something
now when you love something and you've
got that energy and you're busting your
ass on that thing every day but you're
feeling like oh my God like I'm my
potential is becoming usable skill set
this is giving me more energy than it
takes people are loving what I'm doing
now you've really got something
so pursue something that you love and
burnout is going to be way off in the
distance because you're getting energy
the more you pour yourself into it the
better you feel of course there are
going to be limits those limits really
will be distant things
number three
focus on becoming the greatest of all
time
now
are you going to become the greatest of
all time
probably not but let me tell you
I think Tony Robbins is right I think it
is hardwired in us to need to make
progress
there is a fact about goal setting
that the more audacious your goals the
more likely you are to see something
through
now
you have to be able to believe it
most of you when you hear that you
should focus on becoming the greatest of
all time you're going to tune out
that means you've got some pre-work that
you're going to have to do and that
pre-work is this
accept the following truth
you are hopelessly average
I'm hopelessly average life has shown me
that I'm hopelessly average over and
over and over and over and over
now
what is the nature of the human animal
and why
do I want you to start by recognizing
that you are hopelessly average if the
goal is to get you to focus on becoming
the greatest of all time the reason is
that once you understand oh all these
amazing people that have accomplished
all this extraordinary stuff as Steve
Jobs said they're no smarter than you
they're average people that have
understood one thing the human animal is
designed to grow and get better so every
species has to make a choice as it moves
forward up the evolutionary ladder do
you pre-program everything so think
about a horse when a horse is born it
can do all of the things that a horse is
going to be able to do within about 20
minutes it's going to be able to get up
walk around run all that stuff a human
on the other hand has years and years
and years of dependency the reason that
humans have dependencies is because the
choice that we made as a species was
instead of hardwiring everything
make us malleable so we're about 50
hardwired and 50 malleable that means
that we can build on top of our culture
so the culture of horses does not
improve over time horses do basically
whatever they're gonna do for all of
time and it's not going to change if you
look at a human 250 000 years ago when
our DNA was identical okay we are
exactly modern humans 250 000 years ago
but we weren't making iPhones 250 000
years ago now were we it's because
Material Sciences and all the
technological breakthroughs physics all
of that had to happen but because it
happens we don't have to relearn it each
generation so culture Stacks it allows
somebody to be born today and just
quickly absorb all of the knowledge that
came before them and so those 250 000
years of being a modern human boom you
get to download it take advantage of all
the things that are around us and move
forward that is a uniquely human thing
we are the only species that are able to
do that so understanding the very
Foundation of being a human is about
making progress
so I don't need you to actually become
the goat I need you to strive to be the
goat so that you will be leveraging all
of the things that the human animal is
designed to do namely to get better at
whatever you dedicate yourself to
getting truly extraordinary at earlier I
was talking about you have to give
yourself the impulse to adapt or die so
you've got to put yourself in a very
extreme circumstance
the way that you do that is to really
want
that thing that you're going after to
have built an insane amount of Desire
around something you love and then to
focus on getting
truly great
now if you do that if you have that
cocktail now man you are really going to
make real progress because remember
this core idea
skills have utility
you're going to get good at something so
you can do something other people can't
do
you're going to get good at something so
people can't stop you
you can create something that didn't
exist
but to do that you've got to trigger
that whole Loop you've got to really
leverage the fact that big goals get
people excited as long as they believe
that they're possible
you're going to believe that they're
possible because you understand that the
human animal is designed to grow and
change but the way that we do that is we
have to put ourselves in very intense
circumstances to bring that learning out
you've got to be willing to fail and
fail and fail and fail and fail but if
you're excited and believe whoa I can
really become one of the best
that's intoxicating and you need
something that gets you that excited so
you will keep going so as I've said to
people before
I'm almost certainly never going to
become the greatest of all time in any
of the things that I do
but man is it fun trying
but to do that you've got to have the
belief that
let's say that I fail to become the
greatest
it doesn't make me a worse person it
doesn't make my life
mean less I'm pretty guaranteed to be on
my deathbed and be like well I never
became the greatest but man making
progress and constantly pushing myself
that was awesome
so do that which is awesome and strive
to be the greatest of all time right now
how do you keep all that those three
things are a lot of really intense
things you're going to need to celebrate
all along the way
as you're going it's going to be hard
you're carrying a lot of weight you're
pushing yourself it gets very heavy it
can be extremely taxing but if it's fun
and you're celebrating those wins and
you're looking back if you look back on
a weekly or monthly basis you're not
going to be very impressed with yourself
but if you start looking back a year
three years five years you're gonna melt
your brain it's insane how much better
you can get when you start looking in
three year increments so you've got to
celebrate those wins be impressed with
the progress that you've made focus on
it look at it don't constantly bury it
away thinking oh when I'm the greatest
of all time I'll celebrate that would be
the greatest mistake anybody could make
you've got to celebrate all those little
things all along the way because again
the odds that you actually become the
greatest of all time are virtually zero
and punchline of terrifying punch lines
even if you became the greatest of all
time do you know what would happen
you will eventually be like but what's
next
but what's next
that is
the amazing part about being a human
this is why we've sent people to the
Moon
because when we proved that flight was
possible we didn't go oh word we did it
all done thanks we were like whoa if
this is possible what else is possible
and then we made propeller planes and
then jet engine planes and then
things that could take us to the moon
and now we're trying to get to Mars and
then we'll try to warp space and time
and bend it so that we can travel the
distant solar systems
it's just the way that we're wired and
that's awesome but that means that since
you will never be satisfied that you
don't want to make your life about some
end State you want to make your life
about the climb so you want to celebrate
those victories every time you get a
little bit higher you want to recognize
that and be stoked on it so take the
time to make sure that you celebrate if
you don't do that you're going to get to
the top and be horrified it will feel
empty and you will feel vanquished in
Victory
that's about the worst thing I can
imagine
all right number five
you have to learn how to effectively
punish yourself all right this is the
advanced class so number four we're
celebrating all along the way number
five we have to learn how to kick
ourselves in the ass and I find that
people are not good at this one people
can get on board with celebrating the
victories but they can also Plateau
because they don't learn how to be like
no that wasn't good enough I've really
got to keep progressing and so you want
to be careful here because you do not
want to diminish your sense of self you
do not want to beat yourself up or think
less of yourself you want to get to the
point where you're like that was not
good enough I need to go harder I need
to push myself more and if I don't push
myself more then I'm not living up to
the person that I know I can be and I
don't accept that for myself right set
standards you hear me say that all the
time you got to set standards you got to
hold yourself accountable to that
standard but if you do that oh my God
the things you can accomplish are really
extraordinary so make sure
that you know
when you haven't gone hard enough that
you call it out in yourself you say I
don't accept that I don't tolerate that
now I have a rule no matter what you
don't want to spend more than 20 percent
of your time in the punishment Zone
eighty percent of your time needs to be
praising yourself being excited about
where you're going what you're trying to
build the beautiful things you're trying
to do in your life doesn't mean that you
celebrate if there's nothing to
celebrate but it does mean that you
focus on positive things on your ability
to change your ability to grow all of
that even just your willingness to look
at the things you could be doing
differently being proud of your
willingness to look at them
so that's incredibly important but you
have to learn how to effectively punish
yourself again without breaking your
spirit that's the key
all right number six
this one's going to be a bit of a
curveball but wait till you hear number
seven
number six you need to have people in
your life that you love
this is all about neurochemical
management
burning out is either physiologically I
just don't have the ability to generate
ATP or psychologically I'm not into the
thing that I'm pursuing my life isn't
worth living you really do need to round
out your life if you don't want to burn
out there's a reason that my wife is my
number one priority success is not my
number one priority business is not my
number one priority money is not my
number one priority
my marriage is my number one priority
why because it's the most rewarding
thing in my life
it's the thing that gives me the most
now as I told my wife
when we were just dating I said look you
can ask me to give up most anything and
I'm so in love with you I'd probably do
it but you can never ask me to give up
my ambition
but I would say the same thing to my
inner ambition
you can ask me to give up anything
except the love of the people in my life
because that's what makes it all worth
it if I had
all the ambition and all the success and
all the skill set in the world but I
didn't have people around me that loved
me there would be an an innate part I
want you guys to understand there's no
escaping this there's nobody that gets
around this there would be an innate
part in my brain that would feel
dis-ease
because
there would be an unanswered question
what's this all for why am I doing this
because all of that ambition all of that
drive is for one reason and one reason
only
its Nature's solution to answering the
question how do I keep this animal alive
long enough to have kids that have kids
love is one of those ways love is one of
those ways that pair bonds you so that
you will raise the child it is also the
thing that allows you to bond to the
other people in the tribe that you're
going to be
um fighting Against All Odds to stay
alive and to make sure that as a team
that you guys win so that it's this
incredible
motivating factor to love and be loved
this is so important in today's world
and as I was thinking about number six
and thinking about how important if you
really want to stay motivated if you
don't want to burn out
you need love in your life
like that's one of those real things a
lot of people speak in bumper stickers
and they oversimplify the complexity of
the truth
and the reality is that you need people
in your life and as that you love and as
I was thinking about that it got me
thinking about modern culture and
something that's been weighing on my
mind that brings us to number seven
if you want to avoid burnout you need to
be having sex
now I'm presuming that you are an adult
in a committed relationship because this
ties into six
the reason that I say that is right now
in culture adults
are having less and less sex and that
actually scares me not because they're
not having intercourse because of what
sex represents the neurochemical
cocktail present in a loving sexual
relationship is extraordinary and the
fact that that's breaking apart is a
symptom of something in society that's
beginning to fray and it's two parts one
everybody's going to be able to get on
board with and that's number six it's
love and all of that number two is
sexual market value is a real thing
sexual market value is about recognizing
your potential it's about being worthy
of another human being and Crossing into
this energy Zone and I don't mean that
in like a frou-frou way I mean the
energetically sex is unlike anything
else you will do in life there's nothing
else like it the eating the greatest
food people will say oh my God that's
better than sex it's not the same the
way that you talk the way that you act
the way that you're thinking your brain
patterns all of of it is different it is
truly energetically a very different
thing
and getting to the point where you feel
not only that you feel worthy of this
incredible
necessary for the survival of the
species and do you really think that
evolution is baked in the very thing
that you must do and not made it
important to the very thing that lets
you strive and push yourself to being
better burning out is the enemy of that
you don't think that sex is going to
play any role in that of becoming the
kind of person that is worthy of sharing
that ultimate Pinnacle experience you
really think that you can just sidestep
that and there's going to be no
consequences I'm telling you this is one
thing I'm putting this is the first time
I've talked about this on camera I'm
putting my finger on this right now this
is one of the most troubling trends that
I see in society people are letting
something Fray it is multi-faceted
there's no doubt that my thinking on
this will continue to evolve but I'm
telling you right now
one of the most important things about
not burning out is having loving
relationships one of the ways that we
pair bond as a species is sex and that
sex is partly about striving to become
the kind of person that is worth sharing
that with somebody else and yes we each
have to bring that to the table we each
have to become a worthy partner
and I see that sliding in society right
now if you want to avoid burnout become
somebody who is worth having sex with
damn that's real [__] I mean that that's
hard I don't know how the world is going
to take it but I'm telling you right now
face up to that you've got to become the
kind of person that respects yourself
and that other people respect and
that you can find your way to that other
thing
it just is that's that's real
all right you can light the uh the
comments on fire because I know that
one's going to be highly controversial
trust me when I say I say that for your
sake not mine
I want to see people live a beautiful
life I want to see people push
themselves because it will make you feel
good about yourself when you're by
yourself and at the end of the day all
that matters is that you feel good about
yourself when you're by yourself
that's it everybody those are the
secrets to not burning out until next
time my friends be legendary take care
peace
if you want more clarity on the
difference between laziness and burnout
check out this next episode here I am
not a born entrepreneur now there are
many people that consider themselves a
born entrepreneur I am not one of them